From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number five recorded Monday,
February 6th, 2006. Support for Hanselman it's
is provided by automated QA
makers of tests. Complete providing
automated testing of windows.net framework,
Java and web applications online@wwwdotautomatedqa.com.
And by Peter bloom.com start
with better controls. Finish it
better sites online@wwwdotpeterblum.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott discusses the state of
the mano project, an open
source free BSD implementation of
the.net framework. Thank you very
much. This is Carl Franklin and
you're listening to Hansel minutes.
I'm here with Scott again,
and this week we're talking
about mano, are we not?
We are in fact a
good topic. I haven't talked
about mano since I interviewed
Miguel de Caza a long
time ago on dotnet rocks.
And at that point, mano
is in a state where
it was working really well
in ASP net and a
windows forms still hadn't support
hadn't come out yet. And
I guess that's the really
a Holy grail of motto.
Isn't it? Yeah. I mean,
mano as another, as an
optional Java, right. Would be
the Holy grail. So, so
what is it all about?
So I've been re I've
been collecting links, looking at
mano reading about it. I've
been using it for a
while. You know, we do
a lot of asp.net around
here. So anytime someone writes
something in asp.net, they they're
always thinking in the back
of their head, Lou gee
whiz, wouldn't it be nice
to run this on a
different, on a different stack?
Yeah. Now the there's the
windows kind of stack, right?
Which is the buy into
all things, windows way of
thinking about things. But for
many, many years, there's been
a thing that's called the
lamp stack. L I M
P. And that's an acronym
that refers to a Linux,
Apache, my sequel and Pearl,
right. Or Python or PHP,
or any of the, you
know, the P kind of
starting with P languages. And
this lamp stack really kind
of started with CGI in
the nineties and is kind
of move forward. So there's
basically, there's lamp people. And
then there's Microsoft people. And
within the, the mano community,
they kind of started up
another acronym, the lamb L
a M M stack, which
would be Linux Apache, my
SQL, and instead of the
P for Pearl and PHP,
it would be M Vermano.
So you get all of
the benefits of free everything
and of course free like
a puppy. Right. Right. And
you get the convenience and
the flexibility of C-sharp as
your language of choice, Noodling
around with mano, have you
personally done Well, I've done
a lot. I've we know
there's a, there's a fellow
who did a port of
an early version of DAS
blog, DAS blog, the blogging
software that Clemons vaster started
that Omar and I, and
a bunch of guys work
on. It turns out that
if you were going to
get something like DAS blog
running on under mano, what
would, what would be some
things you couldn't do? Well,
you couldn't access the registry
unless you were only on
windows. And of course you
want to get this to
work on Lennox. So there's
some places in Mon in
a dash blog and early
versions desk blog, where we
access the, the registry. Well,
the answer is clear. Linux
has to add a registry,
Slap a registry on it,
and then it would be
good to go, right? They
can have all the, all
the convenience of a giant
binary opaque file that is
easily corruptible. It's the obvious
answer. So there's a number
of different things that are,
that are specific to the
platform that you wouldn't want
to do. So we weren't
thinking about that when we
wrote this blog. So, but
they got a version of
DAS blog up and running
on, on mano. And, you
know, the easiest way for
someone to mess with mano
without messing with their machine
would be to use one
of these mano live CDs.
You can get this@manohyphenlive.com. So
is it an ISO image
kind of thing? Yeah, exactly.
I, him, as you download,
you burn it to a
CD and then you actually
boot directly off the CD
and you get a complete
running Linux distribution with all
the mano tools, configure it,
install with all the paths
and shell scripts and things
that windows people aren't really
savvy about. Yeah. And does
it use a space on
your hard drive? No. It
actually never mounts your C
drive, so you can do
all this work and then
you just start over, you
know, you can save it
to a, you save your
code to a USB key
and then remove the disc
reboot and you're back to
really, So it doesn't recognize
your drives. It doesn't ever
Mount them. You can, you
can optionally Mount your drives.
Okay. But the idea is
that he live CD you
kind of the gestalt around
a live CD, whether it
be the, like the baboon
to Linux live CDs, or
whether it be the ,
let folks do a boot
without all of the pain
and fear of dual booting.
Right. Okay. Well, okay. So
you could go and install
the next on a machine
and get all of the
accoutrement that you needed to
make mano happen. USB key
makes sense. I just run
mano live booting off of
the CD and then you're
into it. And that actually
includes the DAS blog port.
It includes a port of
I spy. That's been running
on my own all sorts
of applications. And one of
the things that's neat about
mano is that it's a,
it's B it's gaining acceptance,
just like the.net framework gained
acceptance before people would go,
gosh, I've got a windows
machine. Do I really want
to Sully it with the.net
framework? Now there are things
like banshee, a popular audio
player. That's just being installed
by default Linux distributions, like
a boon to just install
Moto along for the ride.
So it's becoming ubiquitous for
all those grandmas out there
that are running Linux. Wow.
So one of the things
that I want to kind
of talk about generally, it's
like, what exactly is mano?
Because a lot of people
hear mano and they say,
Oh, well, I figured someone
else went out and basically
wrote everything Microsoft wrote again.
And, you know, that's how
it works. That's basically what
has happened, but they've done
this by not reverse engineering.
It's very important to note
that motto is not someone
peeking into.net and reflect during
they, they explicitly disallow that
if you remember that, that
the CLI that common language
implementation is itself, a specification,
right? And Microsoft released rotor
R O T O R
their own BSD implementation to
make the point very clear
that.net, the B the base
class library, to some extent,
but more importantly, the, the
runtime is a, a thing
that could run anywhere. It
wasn't just a theory. They
wanted to really make that,
make that happen. I've actually
got a screencast. So you
can see@shrinkstir.com slash . That's
just a flash screen cast
that I put together where
I just build a hello
world. And it's not just
a matter of saying, here's
some, C-sharp compile it on
windows, run it on windows.
Here's some sharp ComPilot under
mano and run it on
whatever you can mix and
match, because understand that mano
is a compiler and it's
a kind of a runtime
interpreter or a jitter. So
you can actually have many
combinations that people don't really
think of. You could potentially
compile on windows using the
Microsoft compiler run against mottoes
base class library on Llanos
with mottos jitter, with models,
runtime, or you can do
any combination you could potentially
compile on mano and run
under windows. I mean, if
you can reflect or into
a mano executable, just like
you can into a windows,
because it's the same specification
that I L is there.
And that screencast@trickster.com slash
is a, a real visceral
example of exactly how that
works. So, as I was
saying before, when I spoke
to Miguel a couple of
years ago, we, he, he
was saying that, you know,
they tried to do windows
forms a couple of different
ways, and it just wasn't
together yet. What's the status
of that? Well, there's, there's
lots of pretty cool windows
forms, demos. A lot of
people who are doing this
stuff and making it happen,
the issue is that the,
the, the wind forms library
has to have that underlying
windows windowing rather support. So
there's things like Glade, sharp,
Coco sharp for Mac different
underlying windowing library. So that
when you say, you know,
window w equals new window,
somebody underneath has got to
do the work. And I
guess the problem is that,
you know, why these UIs,
that emulate windows have typically
been slow is because they
basically have to wrap those
low level API calls that
hold resources in the system,
right? Not really. It would
be ideal if someone could
simply call the underlying API
that mapped directly to what
the management is, but what
happens is like early versions
of Java, didn't have what's
called native control support. Remember
when you ran a job
application, it always looked funky.
That's because there really were
not any controls on the
screen. You thought you saw
a button and you thought
you saw listbox, but they
painted them themselves. Then you
got support for when I
say button, I mean, really
give me a button. Yup.
And unfortunately though, there's the
underlying, when doing APIs for
Mac four X, 11, four
for Glade  genome on
a Noam, rather on a
Linux, these are all different
when doing APIs and trying
to make WinForms behave appropriately,
such that it would really
write once, run anywhere. It
can be a little confusing,
but yes, it is totally
possible. I mean, banshee has
an audio player as an
example. And really the most,
the most extreme example is
mom develop, which is a
fork of sharp develop. You
can get it@manodeveloped.com version 0.9
really looks like a nice,
a nice IDE, and it
runs under Mac. It runs
under Linux. It's not a
bad experience. It's certainly not
as polished as visual studio,
but it's a very clear,
for example, that wind farm
support can be made to,
to happen on across platforms.
Speaking of IDs, did you
see sun's new ID? This
is the one they, the
J the eclipse Ajax stuff.
Yeah. There's a lot of,
you know, we, yesterday we
woke up and there were
no IDs and a windows.
People just kind of put
it along thinking that visual
studio was where it was
at. And there was either
visual studio people. There are
people who coded in VI,
and then you wake up
the next day and you
realize, gosh, there are lots
of people out there other
than Don boxers off using
Emacs. There are lots of
people out there coding just
happily in these free IDs.
On the windows side, sharp
develop is really very impressive.
There's actually a rocks book,
one of the big red,
but books, like the ones
that bill having an eye
right for that is a
dissection of sharp develop. And
it's a fantastic basically autopsy
of a really COVID okay.
The wind farms application, that
decisions they made, the decisions
that they didn't. And you
can go up at
dot com slash B T
H, and download sharp develop
totally free. IDE it's kind
of like the, it looks
like visual studio kind of,
it really does it. It's
got some visual studio, like
a likeness to it, but
it is really its own
beast. It's got the built
actually, one of the things
I would suggest when you
go to sharp developers, go
to the page, scroll all
the way down to the
bottom. And there's a really
small section that says you
can download unstable builds. There's
a one.one version and a
two hour version check out
the unstable builds. They've got
stuff like support for code
coverage and testing built directly
into it. The debugger works
a law for a very
long time. Sharp developed didn't
have any debugger support. And
if you want to do
any kind of optional language
support on, on an 80
sharp developed, lets you do
that. There's a really great
language called boo boo is
what they call a wrist
friendly CLI language. So a
language for the common language
implementation, meaning a dotnet based
language that is friendly to
your wrists. These guys basically
said all these curly braces
and, and parentheses are all
very confusing. You're always from
top of the page to
the bottom of the page,
trying to make sure that
your, your brackets match up
with BU it's kinda like
it's kind of like Python
in that there is a
meaningful white space. You don't
use curly braces to indicate
a block. You actually use
indentation. So indentations meaningful. And
if you want to end
your, your method, you hit
enter twice and you start
writing your next method. So
it really gets rid of
a lot of the fluff.
It's very comfortable language. It
feels like Python kind of
feels like Ruby, but actually,
you know, for a VB
guy, your VB guy. Yeah,
yeah. I'm looking at it.
It looks very VB. Like
There is a, there's a
thing they call duck typing,
which is something that they
kind of took from Python.
That Ruby also claims to
have, which is if it
looks like a duck and
it walks like a duck,
it must be a duck.
So if you go X
equals four, it'll do typing
of that. But not in
the sense of a variant
where it figures out at
runtime. In this case, the
compiler actually figures out at
a compile time. This, this
is an ant right now.
I can see because he's
gone X equals four. So
it looks a little scary.
Well, it is a little
scary, but you guys deal
with it at runtime every
day with your, with your
variants and your crazy stuff
You don't use. I don't
use variants. Oh, absolutely. Okay,
good. I hate the variants.
Variants are evil. That's true.
Yeah. So his, so his
options strict off Evil. Fantastic.
You would, you would like
boo. Boo, I think is
an, if, if ever there
could be a language that
somehow merged the, you know,
got the C-sharp people and
the VB people to like,
you know, throw down their
arms and have a cup
of coffee, you know, something
like BU would, would allow
you to do that. Okay.
Definitely something you want to
would want to check out.
I will. Hey, this is
Carl Franklin checkout test complete from
automated qa.com. Test complete does
automated testing of windows.net framework,
Java and web applications. It's
won jolt awards two years
in a row from software
development magazine, even though it's
been voted best testing tool
test complete is really affordable.
It costs just a fraction
of what you'd have to
pay for its nearest big
name. Competitor test complete is
standards based and extensible with
a well-documented plugin API and
the test scripts use familiar
languages, VB script, Java script,
C-sharp script C plus plus
script, and even Delphi scripts.
You choose the language that
works best for your team.
You don't have to buy
a dozen different modules to
test all your applications. Test
complete is a full test
development environment. It has features
like an easy to use
windows test recorder that auto
creates test scripts and an
advanced script editor with features
like syntax highlighting code completion,
and context sensitive help. It
has test execute a lightweight
utility for running distributed tests
and test recorder, a library
for building tests into your
application. And if you plan
on using visual studio, 2005
team system test complete integrates
nicely with it and adds
a new test, complete test
type. So do yourself a
favor in download a free
evaluation copy of testcomplete@automatedqa.com. All
right. So we've got the
languages in the windows forms
and all that stuff. What
is, what is monetarily made
up of? What's the compiler?
What is it? So this
is a really interesting thing
about model. The compiler itself
is actually written in C
sharp and the compiler can
compile itself. It's been able
to compile itself since late
December of 2001. Yeah. So
they've, I don't know quite
how a compiler builds itself.
You certainly couldn't build the
new version with the new
version cause you're in the
process of building the new
version. So there's some potential
space, time anomalies and possibly
ripping open the fabric of
the time that could affect
as long as you're not
writing over your own file.
You're okay. Probably, but there's
actually two mano compilers. Interestingly
enough, there's one called MCs.
Just like we're used to
the, you know, CSC under
the C sharp compiler. MCs
is the one O mano
compiler and then G M
C S G is for
generics is the two old
compounders. So there's actually two
compilers and there's actually two
class libraries. So you'd have
to put a little thought
in that. So by default,
if you run MCs, you'll
be building one O code
against the two O class
library. So Amano guys, do
you have to give a
little bit of thought about
what they're trying to accomplish
and if they, if they
just want things to work
on mono it'll work great.
But if they want to
do cross platform things, they
need to give a little
bit of thought into what
they're trying to, trying to
do now for anyone who
doesn't know what cross-platform means,
what are the platforms that
we're talking about? Yeah. So
the, the list of, of
architectures is, is pretty long,
but it works on, on
Linux. It works on Solaris.
It works on windows. It
works on, you know, all
the different BSD variants, open
BSD, net, BSD, things like
that. And then on some
of the more kind of
weird things like HPUX, there's
an interpreter, but you know,
for the most part, the,
the, the easy answer is
Linux windows, Solaris, and Mac
OS 10. Yeah. Now that's
interesting. I mean, it's all.
And I said this to
Miguel too, you know, the
day I really become interested
in mano is the day
where I can, you know,
email an exe and windows,
the ECC that I've compiled
on a windows app to
my Mac friend and have
him open it and run
it. And you can totally,
you can actually totally do
that. Now are there, I
know a lot of people
who do Mac mano development
on their windows machines, and
then they just copy the
executable over to their Mac
to get that stuff. And
the question obviously is how
rich is the support? So
obviously anything that isn't windows
is not there, but what
else is, I mean, well,
so you have access to
web services. Yeah. So, so
actually more powerful than the
wind form stuff, which of
course you would struggle with
third party controls and you
couldn't just drop in any
old funky grid control. You
can't just go grab all
the Infragistics stuff and make
it work. Unless they've gotten
a mano, a mano stuff
working because anytime someone does
a pee invoke or a
comment or op or anything
like that, then you're often
in space. Right. But on
the, on the asp.net side,
there is some crazy, fantastic
support. I mean, it's really
slick, right? Yeah. That's where
it makes a lot of
sense. Totally, totally. I mean,
I would very much want
the next version of dusk
blog to be extracted away
enough that someone could be
running it on Linux and
my SQL on or on
a Mount, on a Mac.
And then on the windows
side use, you know, my
SQL or SQL express or
whatever, you know, you, you
know about Cassini, right? Yes.
This is the file based
a web server that Scott
Guthrie's team wrote for ice
peanut too well. So The
motto guys have got their
own kind of Cassini called
X S P. And this
is the tiny little web
server that's written, mostly managed
code that lets you run
just HTTP. You can't run
SSL, but you can test
your stuff. You basically fire
it up just in time,
you do your thing and
then you shut it down.
But they've also got a
thing called mod mano, which
is the equivalent of a
nice sappy DLL. If you
put it in the terms
of a person, right. People
at the low level, right?
These ISI API, these ice
sappy filters, the internet server
API, and that's a bridge
between AIS and whatever you're
deciding to call. Yeah. So
these different modules that you
plug into a patchy provide
you with that bridge. Apache
handles the HDP traffic and
mano, their asp.net runtime would
handle the actual generation of
the pages. They've got some
ASP on that. Two O
support. They've got web services
support. I mean, it really
works. You, you wouldn't have
been able to, they wouldn't
have been able to get
any version of dash blog
going with all the crazy
stuff that we're doing in
there with the view States.
And post-bac, I mean, it's
all there, all the eventing
and it's very, very rich.
And they're just the fact
that they've got all of
'em, all of  running
under undermine. It's pretty, it's
pretty amazing stuff. And it's
amazing. Sometimes people don't, sometimes
people don't want to run
IAS in their, in their
data centers. Sometimes people aren't
really comfortable running windows. Perhaps
they may already have a
whole pile of Linux machines
and they just say, you
know, I just said, I'm
not really comfortable hiring you,
you know, Fred developer, because
everything we do here is
Linux. You know, what can
you really offer me? And
now that I think the,
the bigotry against mottos lash.net
in the Linux world is
going away simply by virtue
of the fact that it
works. Yeah. It's always nice
to use success a metric.
Yeah. You don't go say,
Oh, well, yeah, this totally
works. Know, are you sure
this isn't just a toy?
No, you don't. I know
Novell does this. And it
kind of, you know, our
compiler does 18,000 lines of
second. You know, we, we
kind of know what we're
doing. They've really proven themselves.
What are the, what are
the developer tools look like
other than the IDs? Are
there any tools out there
that help help you with
the motto? So if, if,
if I were personally writing
motto and I was gonna
try to like, do some
work for someone writing motto,
I would probably either use
sharp develop. But since I'm
such a visual studio guy,
there is an interesting visual
studio add in that you
can get called PRJ project
to make PRJ, to make,
and you can get this@shrinkstir.com
slash  or more interestingly,
the visual studio add in
specific version of that at
shrinks.com/bt F. This is an
add in that adds a
menu to visual studio that
allows you to create solutions,
create CS projects and different
projects within visual studio, compile
them on windows, test them
on windows. And then when
it comes time to test
it on, on motto, you
just go to the menu
and you say, test on
mano and handles the convert,
the kind of on the
fly conversion of that. So
this adds a mint, this
add this project to make
ads, a menu to visual
studio. And then I can
just click on it and
say test and mano compile
and motto. But interestingly, I
don't think that the, the,
the, the bridge between visual
studio and mano personally is
really going to happen with
little ins, like this little
toys like this, as, as
clever as it is. Yeah.
So I think it's really
ms. Bill. That is where
the interesting thing of things
are gonna happen because ms.
Build is more than just
Microsoft's version of Nat. It's
a whole build system. I
hope backend build system is
just as they've got the,
the Microsoft be, are you
familiar with this MSB project?
Yeah. Right. This is the
build Everett environment. This is
the ability to actually build
dotnet one, one code using
visual studio two Oh 2005.
Yeah. So there's a guy
named Gustavo Garah who has
a, a Target's file. These
ms. Build files are built
up of a build targets,
and he has actually added
in mano support to his
own, his own target file.
And you can get that
at shrink, stir.com/btl. And this
is pretty low level stuff.
So, I mean, unless you're
a person who wants to
poke around inside of ms.
Build and try to get
this thing working, it might
be more interesting just to
kind of read. You can
also search my blog that
computer's end for ms. Build.
And I talk about kind
of how that works. And
if you search just for
ms. Build and mano, you'll
start seeing some interesting work.
There's a guy named Matt
ward. Who's got some custom
ms. Build tasks. So he's
actually created tasks in ms.
Build that would be used
for compiling motto three. He's
created an MCs task to
call them mano a mano
stuff. That's one way to
look at it. And then
there's the creation of an
entire Target's file to do
the same. So this guy,
Gustavo is interesting cause he
not only did it for.net.net,
one, one, one, mano. He
did it for compact framework
as well. So he's got
an EMIS build file such
that you could do an
application that would simultaneously compile
on, you know, as many
as 11 different dotnet frameworks.
Wow. That's sweet. So, you
know, this, this stuff isn't
necessarily ready for prime time,
but it's pretty darn amazing.
Now what about grasshopper? I've
heard about this as being
a pretty cool tool for
Linux. Yeah. So the, the
main soft guys at dev
dot  dot com, I've
got this visual main wind
version 1.74 J two EE.
But since that's so hard
to say, it's just called
grasshopper. And this is an
interesting relationship that they've got
with, with the mano guys.
What they've done is in
the past means soft has
been known for creating a
C API layer in Linux,
such that a windows, API
developer, or a windows developer
writing in C or C
plus, plus, who's going to
call like load library and
all the kinds of things
that we used to do
in, in unmanaged code. They
wrote a layer such that
you could run applications cross-platform
except when someone called the
library or show window or
peak message, it would call
the underlying API written by
these guys. So what they've
done is they've taken a
chunk of mano. The cause
of the model source code
is available and they have
a compiler that will take
that ill and turn it
into Java bytecode wow, because
if you think about IPL,
it's really trying to express
the programmer's intent and Java
byte code expresses the intent
as well. Really what you
need to do is express
that intent in such a
way that the abstract things
translate very directly. And then
when it comes time to
go and do something really
physical, like get that file,
they would translate something like
a file.open command and.net into
whatever the equivalent Java API
is underneath. Or in this
case, probably the underlying Linux
machines file open APIs. They've
integrated all of this with
visual studio in a really
amazing way. Wow. You can
say, build, get all this
Java code that's going to
pop out and they'll actually
create a whole JTE package.
And then you can send
that information over to J
boss. I like winning Tomcat
or anything like that, or
you can compile it and
deploy it off to WebSphere.
And I've actually played with
some of this stuff. And
it's, it's, it's real, it's
real weird to be clear
because you're taking, you're taking,
C-sharp compiling it into this,
this aisle that gets translated,
compile off into byte code,
and then it's not running
on mano anymore. To be
clear, it's running against the
mano base class library, having
been translated into Java. It's
a, quite a hybrid. I
mean, it's kind of, if
you ever heard the term
Rube Goldberg, absolutely. You know,
it's like the little guy
jumps off the cliff thing,
the mouse trap. It's pretty,
it's pretty crazy stuff, but
you know, somehow they, it
work, you know, it's, it's
certainly worth checking out if
you were, if you were
interested in doing cross-platform stuff,
but more, more than for
the cross platform stuff, which
I think mano does by
itself. Very, very well. If
you have a client who
insists that this must be
in our JTE environment because
we do JTE here, right?
We like the management tools
we trust IBM, we want
to be JTE shop. Then
this could be something that
we're a.net developer could really
get some, some useful work
done, particularly on the asp.net
side. Yeah. I have personally
translated asp.net sites over into
a grasshopper and it, it
does work. It's pretty amazing
stuff. All right, Scott, well,
this is pretty good. You
know, a motto seems like
it's come a long way
since I interviewed Miguel. And
it's good to know that
you're using it as well.
Yeah. I think at the
very least every, every dotnet
programmer should at least give
it a try. You can
install the motto for windows
installer. It sets up everything
for you. It's very familiar.
It gives you the mano
command prompt, just like we
have the visual studio command
prompt, and then, you know,
go and install a mano
develop or a sharp develop
one of the betas and
just start, start playing with
it. I really think it
can be a, be a
powerful thing to at least
understand where mano fits into
the larger scheme of things.
Even if a windows developer
would never end up using
it. Very good. Alright, Scott,
that wraps it up for
another episode of Hansel minutes.
We'll see you next week.